---
title: "Introduction to Science and the Realm of Physics, Physical Quantities,
and Units"
layout: page
---

![The spiral galaxy Andromeda is shown.](../resources/Figure_01_00_01.jpg "Galaxies are as immense as atoms are small. Yet the same laws of physics describe both, and all the rest of nature&#x2014;an indication of the underlying unity in the universe. The laws of physics are surprisingly few in number, implying an underlying simplicity to nature&#x2019;s apparent complexity. (credit: NASA, JPL-Caltech, P. Barmby, Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics)")
{: #Figure1}

What is your first reaction when you hear the word “physics”? Did you imagine
working through difficult equations or memorizing formulas that seem to have no
real use in life outside the physics classroom? Many people come to the subject
of physics with a bit of fear. But as you begin your exploration of this
broad-ranging subject, you may soon come to realize that physics plays a much
larger role in your life than you first thought, no matter your life goals or
career choice.

For example, take a look at the image above. This image is of the Andromeda
Galaxy, which contains billions of individual stars, huge clouds of gas, and
dust. Two smaller galaxies are also visible as bright blue spots in the
background. At a staggering 2.5 million light years from the Earth, this galaxy
is the nearest one to our own galaxy (
which is called the Milky Way). The stars and planets that make up Andromeda
might seem to be the furthest thing from most people’s regular, everyday lives.
But Andromeda is a great starting point to think about the forces that hold
together the universe. The forces that cause Andromeda to act as it does are the
same forces we contend with here on Earth, whether we are planning to send a
rocket into space or simply raise the walls for a new home. The same gravity
that causes the stars of Andromeda to rotate and revolve also causes water to
flow over hydroelectric dams here on Earth. Tonight, take a moment to look up at
the stars. The forces out there are the same as the ones here on Earth. Through
a study of physics, you may gain a greater understanding of the
interconnectedness of everything we can see and know in this universe.

Humans have created and manufactured millions of different objects over the history of our species. Successive technological periods (often referred to as the Stone Age, the Bronze Age, the Iron Age, and so on) were marked by our knowledge of the physical properties of certain materials and our ability to manipulate them. This knowledge all stems from physics, whether it's the way a rock would flake when constructing a spear point, the effect of integrating carbon with iron in South Indian and Sri Lankan furnaces to create the earliest high-quality steel, or the proper way to combine perfectly ground and polished pieces of glass to create optical instruments. Our current technological age, the Information Age, builds on all that knowledge and can be traced to critical innovations made by people from all backgrounds working together. Mohamed M. Atalla and Dawon Kahng, for example, invented the **MOSFET** (metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect transistor). Although unknown to most people, this tiny device, created in 1959 by an Egyptian-born scientist and Korean-born scientist working in a lab in New Jersey, is the basis for modern electronics. More MOSFETs have been produced than any other object in human history. They are used in computers, smartphones, microwave ovens, automotive controls, medical instruments, and nearly every other electronic device.

Next, think about the most exciting modern technologies that you have heard about in the news, such as trains that levitate above tracks, “invisibility cloaks” that bend light around them, and microscopic robots that fight cancer cells in our bodies. All of these groundbreaking advancements, commonplace or unbelievable, rely on the principles of physics. Aside from playing a significant role in technology, professionals such as engineers, pilots, physicians, physical therapists, electricians, and computer programmers apply physics concepts in their daily work. For example, a pilot must understand how wind forces affect a flight path and a physical therapist must understand how the muscles in the body experience forces as they move and bend. As you will learn in this text, physics principles are propelling new, exciting technologies, and these principles are applied in a wide range of careers.

In this text, you will begin to explore the history of the formal study of
physics, beginning with natural philosophy and the ancient Greeks, and leading
up through a review of Sir Isaac Newton and the laws of physics that bear his
name. You will also be introduced to the standards scientists use when they
study physical quantities and the interrelated system of measurements most of
the scientific community uses to communicate in a single mathematical language.
Finally, you will study the limits of our ability to be accurate and precise,
and the reasons scientists go to painstaking lengths to be as clear as possible
regarding their own limitations.
