---
title: "Introduction to Work, Energy, and Energy Resources"
layout: page
---




![A field with four wind turbines and the Sun setting in the background.](../resources/Figure_08_00_01a_D.jpg "How many forms of energy can you identify in this photograph of a wind farm in Iowa? (credit: J&#xFC;rgen from Sandesneben, Germany, Wikimedia Commons)")
{: #import-auto-id1758685}

*Energy* plays an essential role both in everyday events and in scientific
phenomena. You can no doubt name many forms of energy, from that provided by our
foods, to the energy we use to run our cars, to the sunlight that warms us on
the beach. You can also cite examples of what people call energy that may not be
scientific, such as someone having an energetic personality. Not only does
energy have many interesting forms, it is involved in almost all phenomena, and
is one of the most important concepts of physics. What makes it even more
important is that the total amount of energy in the universe is constant. Energy
can change forms, but it cannot appear from nothing or disappear without a
trace. Energy is thus one of a handful of physical quantities that we say is *
conserved*.

**Conservation of energy**{: data-type="term" #import-auto-id1993502} (as
physicists like to call the principle that energy can neither be created nor
destroyed) is based on experiment. Even as scientists discovered new forms of
energy, conservation of energy has always been found to apply. Perhaps the most
dramatic example of this was supplied by Einstein when he suggested that mass is
equivalent to energy (his famous equation $$ E=mc^{2} $$
).

From a societal viewpoint, energy is one of the major building blocks of modern
civilization. Energy resources are key limiting factors to economic growth. The
world use of energy resources, especially oil, continues to grow, with ominous
consequences economically, socially, politically, and environmentally. We will
briefly examine the worldâ€™s energy use patterns at the end of this chapter.

There is no simple, yet accurate, scientific definition for energy. Energy is
characterized by its many forms and the fact that it is conserved. We can
loosely define **energy**{: data-type="term" #import-auto-id2491386} as the
ability to do work, admitting that in some circumstances not all energy is
available to do work. Because of the association of energy with work, we begin
the chapter with a discussion of work. Work is intimately related to energy and
how energy moves from one system to another or changes form.

