---
title: "Introduction to One-Dimensional Kinematics"
layout: page
---


<cnx-pi data-type="cnx.flag.introduction"> class="introduction" </cnx-pi>

<cnx-pi data-type="cnx.eoc">class="section-summary" title="Section Summary"<
/cnx-pi>

<cnx-pi data-type="cnx.eoc">class="conceptual-questions" title="Conceptual
Questions"</cnx-pi>

<cnx-pi data-type="cnx.eoc">class="problems-exercises" title="Problems &amp;
Exercises"</cnx-pi>

![Photo of a bird in flight.](../resources/Figure_02_00_01_D.jpg "The motion of an American kestrel through the air can be described by the bird&#x2019;s displacement, speed, velocity, and acceleration. When it flies in a straight line without any change in direction, its motion is said to be one dimensional. (credit: Vince Maidens, Wikimedia Commons)")
{: #import-auto-id2758213}

Objects are in motion everywhere we look. Everything from a tennis game to a
space-probe flyby of the planet Neptune involves motion. When you are resting,
your heart moves blood through your veins. And even in inanimate objects, there
is continuous motion in the vibrations of atoms and molecules. Questions about
motion are interesting in and of themselves: *How long will it take for a space
probe to get to Mars? Where will a football land if it is thrown at a certain
angle?* But an understanding of motion is also key to understanding other
concepts in physics. An understanding of acceleration, for example, is crucial
to the study of force.

Our formal study of physics begins with **kinematics**{: data-type="term"
#import-auto-id4259538} which is defined as the *study of motion without
considering its causes*. The word “kinematics” comes from a Greek term meaning
motion and is related to other English words such as “cinema” (movies) and
“kinesiology” (the study of human motion). In one-dimensional kinematics
and [Two-Dimensional Kinematics](/contents/m42126) we will study only the *
motion* of a football, for example, without worrying about what forces cause or
change its motion. Such considerations come in other chapters. In this chapter,
we examine the simplest type of motion—namely, motion along a straight line, or
one-dimensional motion. In [Two-Dimensional Kinematics](/contents/m42126), we
apply concepts developed here to study motion along curved paths (two- and
three-dimensional motion); for example, that of a car rounding a curve.

