---
title: "Biological Effects of Ionizing Radiation"
layout: page
---

<div class="abstract" markdown="1">
* Define various units of radiation.
* Describe RBE.
</div>

We hear many seemingly contradictory things about the biological effects of
ionizing radiation. It can cause cancer, burns, and hair loss, yet it is used to
treat and even cure cancer. How do we understand these effects? Once again,
there is an underlying simplicity in nature, even in complicated biological
organisms. All the effects of ionizing radiation on biological tissue can be
understood by knowing that **ionizing radiation affects molecules within cells,
particularly DNA molecules.**

Let us take a brief look at molecules within cells and how cells operate. Cells
have long, double-helical DNA molecules containing chemical codes called genetic
codes that govern the function and processes undertaken by the cell. It is for
unraveling the double-helical structure of DNA that James Watson, Francis Crick,
and Maurice Wilkins received the Nobel Prize. Damage to DNA consists of breaks
in chemical bonds or other changes in the structural features of the DNA chain,
leading to changes in the genetic code. In human cells, we can have as many as a
million individual instances of damage to DNA per cell per day. It is remarkable
that DNA contains codes that check whether the DNA is damaged or can repair
itself. It is like an auto check and repair mechanism. This repair ability of
DNA is vital for maintaining the integrity of the genetic code and for the
normal functioning of the entire organism. It should be constantly active and
needs to respond rapidly. The rate of DNA repair depends on various factors such
as the cell type and age of the cell. A cell with a damaged ability to repair
DNA, which could have been induced by ionizing radiation, can do one of the
following:

* The cell can go into an irreversible state of dormancy, known as senescence.
* The cell can commit suicide, known as programmed cell death.
* The cell can go into unregulated cell division leading to tumors and cancers.

Since ionizing radiation damages the DNA, which is critical in cell
reproduction, it has its greatest effect on cells that rapidly reproduce,
including most types of cancer. Thus, cancer cells are more sensitive to
radiation than normal cells and can be killed by it easily. Cancer is
characterized by a malfunction of cell reproduction, and can also be caused by
ionizing radiation. Without contradiction, ionizing radiation can be both a cure
and a cause.

To discuss quantitatively the biological effects of ionizing radiation, we need
a radiation dose unit that is directly related to those effects. All effects of
radiation are assumed to be directly proportional to the amount of ionization
produced in the biological organism. The amount of ionization is in turn
proportional to the amount of deposited energy. Therefore, we define a **
radiation dose unit** called the **rad**, as $$1/100 $$ of a joule of ionizing
energy deposited per kilogram of tissue, which is

<div class="equation" >
 $$1 \text{rad}=0.01 \text{J/kg}. $$
</div>

For example, if a 50.0-kg person is exposed to ionizing radiation over her
entire body and she absorbs 1.00 J, then her whole-body radiation dose is

<div class="equation" >
 $$\left(1.00 \text{J}\right)/\left(50.0 \text{kg}\right)=0.0200 \text{J/kg}=2.00 \text{rad} \text{.}  $$
</div>

If the same 1.00 J of ionizing energy were absorbed in her 2.00-kg forearm
alone, then the dose to the forearm would be

<div class="equation" >
 $$\left(1.00 \text{J}\right)/\left(2.00 \text{kg}\right)=0.500 \text{J/kg}=50.0 \text{rad} \text{,}  $$
</div>

and the unaffected tissue would have a zero rad dose. While calculating
radiation doses, you divide the energy absorbed by the mass of affected tissue.
You must specify the affected region, such as the whole body or forearm in
addition to giving the numerical dose in rads. The SI unit for radiation dose is
the **gray (Gy)**{: class="term"}, which is defined to be

<div class="equation" >
 $$1 Gy=1 \text{J/kg}=100 \text{rad} \text{.}  $$
</div>

However, the rad is still commonly used. Although the energy per kilogram in 1
rad is small, it has significant effects since the energy causes ionization. The
energy needed for a single ionization is a few eV, or less than $$ 10^{-18}
\text{J} $$ . Thus, 0.01 J of ionizing energy can create a huge number of ion
pairs and have an effect at the cellular level.

The effects of ionizing radiation may be directly proportional to the dose in
rads, but they also depend on the type of radiation and the type of tissue. That
is, for a given dose in rads, the effects depend on whether the radiation is
$$\alpha , \beta , \gamma , $$ x-ray, or some other type of ionizing radiation.
In the earlier discussion of the range of ionizing radiation, it was noted that
energy is deposited in a series of ionizations and not in a single interaction.
Each ion pair or ionization requires a certain amount of energy, so that the
number of ion pairs is directly proportional to the amount of the deposited
ionizing energy. But, if the range of the radiation is small, as it is for
$$\alpha $$ s, then the ionization and the damage created is more concentrated
and harder for the organism to repair, as seen in [[Figure 1]](#Figure1).
Concentrated damage is more difficult for biological organisms to repair than
damage that is spread out, so short-range particles have greater biological
effects. The **relative biological effectiveness** (RBE) or **quality factor** (
QF) is given in [[Table 1]](#Table1) for several types of ionizing radiation—the
effect of the radiation is directly proportional to the RBE. A dose unit more
closely related to effects in biological tissue is called the **roentgen
equivalent man** or rem and is defined to be the dose in rads multiplied by the
relative biological effectiveness.

<div class="equation" >
 $$rem=rad×RBE $$
</div>

![The image shows ionization created in cells by gamma and alpha radiation. Series of cells are shown through which a gamma ray passes causing ionization whose density is low. Another series of cells are shown through which an alpha ray passes causing ionization whose density is high.](../resources/Figure_33_02_01a.jpg "The image shows ionization created in cells by \( \alpha \); and \( \gamma \) radiation. Because of its shorter range, the ionization and damage created by \( \alpha \) is more concentrated and harder for the organism to repair. Thus, the RBE for \( \alpha \)s is greater than the RBE for \( \gamma \)s, even though they create the same amount of ionization at the same energy.")
{: #Figure1}

So, if a person had a whole-body dose of 2.00 rad of $$\gamma $$ radiation, the
dose in rem would be $$(2.00 \text{rad})(1) = 2.00 \text{rem whole body}} $$ .
If the person had a whole-body dose of 2.00 rad of $$\alpha $$ radiation, then
the dose in rem would be $$(2.00 \text{rad})(20) = 40.0 \text{rem whole body} $$
. The $$\alpha $$ s would have 20 times the effect on the person than the
$$\gamma $$ s for the same deposited energy. The SI equivalent of the rem is
the **sievert** (Sv), defined to be $$\text{Sv}=\text{Gy}×\text{RBE} $$ , so
that

<div class="equation" >
 $$1 Sv=1 Gy×\text{RBE}=100 \text{rem} \text{.}  $$
</div>

The RBEs given in [[Table 1]](#Table1) are approximate, but they yield certain
insights. For example, the eyes are more sensitive to radiation, because the
cells of the lens do not repair themselves. Neutrons cause more damage than
$$\gamma $$ rays, although both are neutral and have large ranges, because
neutrons often cause secondary radiation when they are captured. Note that the
RBEs are 1 for higher-energy $$\beta $$ s, $$\gamma $$ s, and x-rays, three of
the most common types of radiation. For those types of radiation, the numerical
values of the dose in rem and rad are identical. For example, 1 rad of $$\gamma
$$ radiation is also 1 rem. For that reason, rads are still widely quoted rather
than rem. [[Table 2]](#Table2) summarizes the units that are used for radiation.

<div class="note" data-has-label="true" data-label="" markdown="1">
<div class="title">
Misconception Alert: Activity vs. Dose
</div>
“Activity” refers to the radioactive source while “dose” refers to the amount of energy from the radiation that is deposited in a person or object.

</div>

A high level of activity doesn’t mean much if a person is far away from the
source. The activity $$R $$ of a source depends upon the quantity of material (
kg) as well as the half-life. A short half-life will produce many more
disintegrations per second. Recall that $$R=\frac{0.693N}{ {t}_{1/2}} $$ . Also,
the activity decreases exponentially, which is seen in the equation $$R={R}_
{0}{e}^{-\lambda t} $$.

<table id="Table1" summary="This is a two column table. The left column is labeled type and energy of radiation. The right column is labeled R B E and gives values corresponding with each type and energy of radiation. A note says that R B E values are approximate and difficult to determine."><caption><span class="title">Relative Biological Effectiveness</span></caption><thead><tr>
            <th data-align="center">
              Type and energy of radiation
            </th>
            <th data-align="center">
             RBE<sup class="footnote-number" id="footnote-ref1"><a class="footnote-link" href="#footnote1">1</a></sup>
            </th>
          </tr></thead><tbody><tr>
            <td>X-rays</td>
            <td>1</td>
          </tr><tr>
            <td>$$ \gamma  $$ rays</td>
            <td>1</td>
          </tr><tr>
            <td>$$ \beta  $$ rays greater than 32 keV</td>
            <td>1</td>
          </tr><tr>
            <td>$$ \beta  $$rays less than 32 keV</td>
            <td>1.7</td>
          </tr><tr>
            <td>Neutrons, thermal to slow (&lt;20 keV)</td>
            <td>2–5</td>
          </tr><tr>
            <td>Neutrons, fast (1–10 MeV)</td>
            <td>10 (body), 32 (eyes)</td>
          </tr><tr>
            <td>Protons (1–10 MeV)</td>
            <td>10 (body), 32 (eyes)</td>
          </tr><tr>
            <td> $$\alpha  $$ rays from radioactive decay</td>
            <td>10–20</td>
          </tr><tr>
            <td>Heavy ions from accelerators</td>
            <td>10–20</td>
          </tr></tbody></table>

<table id="Table2" summary="This is a five column table with three rows. In each row, a quantity of radiation is given. In each column, the S I unit name, definition, former unit and conversion factor are given for each of the three radiation quantities."><caption><span class="title">Units for Radiation</span></caption><thead><tr>
            <th data-align="center">Quantity</th>
            <th data-align="center">SI unit name</th>
            <th data-align="center">Definition</th>
            <th data-align="center">Former unit</th>
            <th data-align="center">Conversion</th>
          </tr></thead><tbody><tr>
            <td>Activity</td>
            <td>Becquerel (bq)</td>
            <td>decay/sec</td>
            <td>Curie (Ci)</td>
            <td> $$1 Bq =  2.7 \times 10^{-11} \text{Ci} $$</td>
          </tr><tr>
            <td>Absorbed dose</td>
            <td>Gray (Gy)</td>
            <td>1 J/kg</td>
            <td>rad</td>
            <td> $$\text{Gy = 100 rad} $$</td>
          </tr><tr>
            <td>Dose Equivalent</td>
            <td>Sievert (Sv)</td>
            <td>1 J/kg × RBE</td>
            <td>rem</td>
            <td> $$\text{Sv = 100 rem} $$</td>
          </tr></tbody></table>

The large-scale effects of radiation on humans can be divided into two
categories: immediate effects and long-term effects. [[Table 3]](#Table3) gives
the immediate effects of whole-body exposures received in less than one day. If
the radiation exposure is spread out over more time, greater doses are needed to
cause the effects listed. This is due to the body’s ability to partially repair
the damage. Any dose less than 100 mSv (10 rem) is called a **low dose**, 0.1 Sv
to 1 Sv (10 to 100 rem) is called a **moderate dose**, and anything greater than
1 Sv (100 rem) is called a **high dose**. There is no known way to determine
after the fact if a person has been exposed to less than 10 mSv.

<table id="Table3" summary="This is a two column table. The left column indicates the dose in S v. The right column describes the effects of each dose on the body."><caption><span class="title">Immediate Effects of Radiation (Adults, Whole Body, Single Exposure)</span></caption><thead><tr>
            <th data-align="center">
           Dose in Sv
              <sup class="footnote-number" id="footnote-ref2"><a class="footnote-link" href="#footnote2">2</a></sup>
            </th>
            <th data-align="center">
              Effect
            </th>
          </tr></thead><tbody><tr>
            <td>0–0.10</td>
            <td>No observable effect.</td>
          </tr><tr>
            <td>0.1 – 1</td>
            <td>Slight to moderate decrease in white blood cell counts.</td>
          </tr><tr>
            <td>0.5</td>
            <td>Temporary sterility; 0.35 for women, 0.50 for men.</td>
          </tr><tr>
            <td>1 – 2</td>
            <td>Significant reduction in blood cell counts, brief nausea and vomiting. Rarely fatal.</td>
          </tr><tr>
            <td>2 – 5</td>
            <td>Nausea, vomiting, hair loss, severe blood damage, hemorrhage, fatalities.</td>
          </tr><tr>
            <td>4.5</td>
            <td>LD50/32. Lethal to 50% of the population within 32 days after exposure if not treated.</td>
          </tr><tr>
            <td>5 – 20</td>
            <td>Worst effects due to malfunction of small intestine and blood systems. Limited survival.</td>
          </tr><tr>
            <td>&gt;20</td>
            <td>Fatal within hours due to collapse of central nervous system.</td>
          </tr></tbody></table>

Immediate effects are explained by the effects of radiation on cells and the
sensitivity of rapidly reproducing cells to radiation. The first clue that a
person has been exposed to radiation is a change in blood count, which is not
surprising since blood cells are the most rapidly reproducing cells in the body.
At higher doses, nausea and hair loss are observed, which may be due to
interference with cell reproduction. Cells in the lining of the digestive system
also rapidly reproduce, and their destruction causes nausea. When the growth of
hair cells slows, the hair follicles become thin and break off. High doses cause
significant cell death in all systems, but the lowest doses that cause
fatalities do so by weakening the immune system through the loss of white blood
cells.

The two known long-term effects of radiation are cancer and genetic defects.
Both are directly attributable to the interference of radiation with cell
reproduction. For high doses of radiation, the risk of cancer is reasonably well
known from studies of exposed groups. Hiroshima and Nagasaki survivors and a
smaller number of people exposed by their occupation, such as radium dial
painters, have been fully documented. Chernobyl victims will be studied for many
decades, with some data already available. For example, a significant increase
in childhood thyroid cancer has been observed. The risk of a radiation-induced
cancer for low and moderate doses is generally *assumed* to be proportional to
the risk known for high doses. Under this assumption, any dose of radiation, no
matter how small, involves a risk to human health. This is called the **linear
hypothesis** and it may be prudent, but it<em> is </em> controversial. There is
some evidence that, unlike the immediate effects of radiation, the long-term
effects are cumulative and there is little self-repair. This is analogous to the
risk of skin cancer from UV exposure, which is known to be cumulative.

There is a latency period for the onset of radiation-induced cancer of about 2
years for leukemia and 15 years for most other forms. The person is at risk for
at least 30 years after the latency period. Omitting many details, the overall
risk of a radiation-induced cancer death per year per rem of exposure is about
10 in a million, which can be written as $$10/10^{6} \text{rem} \text{·}
\text{y} $$.

If a person receives a dose of 1 rem, his risk each year of dying from
radiation-induced cancer is 10 in a million and that risk continues for about 30
years. The lifetime risk is thus 300 in a million, or 0.03 percent. Since about
20 percent of all worldwide deaths are from cancer, the increase due to a 1 rem
exposure is impossible to detect demographically. But 100 rem (1 Sv), which was
the dose received by the average Hiroshima and Nagasaki survivor, causes a 3
percent risk, which can be observed in the presence of a 20 percent normal or
natural incidence rate.

The incidence of genetic defects induced by radiation is about one-third that of
cancer deaths, but is much more poorly known. The lifetime risk of a genetic
defect due to a 1 rem exposure is about 100 in a million or $$ 3.3/10^{6}
\text{rem}\cdot \text{y} $$ , but the normal incidence is 60 000 in a million.
Evidence of such a small increase, tragic as it is, is nearly impossible to
obtain. For example, there is no evidence of increased genetic defects among the
offspring of Hiroshima and Nagasaki survivors. Animal studies do not seem to
correlate well with effects on humans and are not very helpful. For both cancer
and genetic defects, the approach to safety has been to use the linear
hypothesis, which is likely to be an overestimate of the risks of low doses.
Certain researchers even claim that low doses are *beneficial*. **Hormesis** is
a term used to describe generally favorable biological responses to low
exposures of toxins or radiation. Such low levels may help certain repair
mechanisms to develop or enable cells to adapt to the effects of the low
exposures. Positive effects may occur at low doses that could be a problem at
high doses.

Even the linear hypothesis estimates of the risks are relatively small, and the
average person is not exposed to large amounts of
radiation. [[Table 4]](#Table4) lists average annual background radiation doses
from natural and artificial sources for Australia, the United States, Germany,
and world-wide averages. Cosmic rays are partially shielded by the atmosphere,
and the dose depends upon altitude and latitude, but the average is about 0.40
mSv/y. A good example of the variation of cosmic radiation dose with altitude
comes from the airline industry. Monitored personnel show an average of 2 mSv/y.
A 12-hour flight might give you an exposure of 0.02 to 0.03 mSv.

Doses from the Earth itself are mainly due to the isotopes of uranium, thorium,
and potassium, and vary greatly by location. Some places have great natural
concentrations of uranium and thorium, yielding doses ten times as high as the
average value. Internal doses come from foods and liquids that we ingest.
Fertilizers containing phosphates have potassium and uranium. So we are all a
little radioactive. Carbon-14 has about 66 Bq/kg radioactivity whereas
fertilizers may have more than 3000 Bq/kg radioactivity. Medical and dental
diagnostic exposures are mostly from x-rays. It should be noted that x-ray doses
tend to be localized and are becoming much smaller with improved
techniques. [[Table 5]](#Table5) shows typical doses received during various
diagnostic x-ray examinations. Note the large dose from a CT scan. While CT
scans only account for less than 20 percent of the x-ray procedures done today,
they account for about 50 percent of the annual dose received.

Radon is usually more pronounced underground and in buildings with low air
exchange with the outside world. Almost all soil contains some
$${}^{226}\text{Ra} $$ and $${}^{222}\text{Rn} $$ , but radon is lower in mainly
sedimentary soils and higher in granite soils. Thus, the exposure to the public
can vary greatly, even within short distances. Radon can diffuse from the soil
into homes, especially basements. The estimated exposure for $${}^{222}\text{Rn}
$$ is controversial. Recent studies indicate there is more radon in homes than
had been realized, and it is speculated that radon may be responsible for 20
percent of lung cancers, being particularly hazardous to those who also smoke.
Many countries have introduced limits on allowable radon concentrations in
indoor air, often requiring the measurement of radon concentrations in a house
prior to its sale. Ironically, it could be argued that the higher levels of
radon exposure and their geographic variability, taken with the lack of
demographic evidence of any effects, means that low-level radiation is *less*
dangerous than previously thought.

### Radiation Protection

Laws regulate radiation doses to which people can be exposed. The greatest
occupational whole-body dose that is allowed depends upon the country and is
about 20 to 50 mSv/y and is rarely reached by medical and nuclear power workers.
Higher doses are allowed for the hands. Much lower doses are permitted for the
reproductive organs and the fetuses of pregnant women. Inadvertent doses to the
public are limited to $$1/10 $$ of occupational doses, except for those caused
by nuclear power, which cannot legally expose the public to more than $$1/1000
$$ of the occupational limit or 0.05 mSv/y (5 mrem/y). This has been exceeded in
the United States only at the time of the Three Mile Island (TMI) accident in
1979. Chernobyl is another story. Extensive monitoring with a variety of
radiation detectors is performed to assure radiation safety. Increased
ventilation in uranium mines has lowered the dose there to about 1 mSv/y.

<table id="Table4" summary="This table lists the average radiation doses for Australia, Germany, the United States and the World. The countries are listed in four columns, while each row describes a specific type of radiation"><caption><span class="title">Background Radiation Sources and Average Doses</span></caption><thead><tr>
             <th data-align="center">
                Source
              </th>
              <th colspan="4" data-align="center">
                Dose (mSv/y)<sup class="footnote-number" id="footnote-ref3"><a class="footnote-link" href="#footnote3">3</a></sup>
               </th>
            </tr></thead><tbody><tr>
            <td>Source</td>
            <td>Australia</td>
            <td>Germany</td>
            <td>United States</td>
            <td>World</td>
          </tr><tr>
            <td>Natural Radiation - external</td>
            <td></td>
            <td></td>
            <td></td>
            <td></td>
          </tr><tr>
            <td> Cosmic Rays</td>
            <td>0.30</td>
            <td>0.28</td>
            <td>0.30</td>
            <td>0.39</td>
          </tr><tr>
            <td> Soil, building materials</td>
            <td>0.40</td>
            <td>0.40</td>
            <td>0.30</td>
            <td>0.48</td>
          </tr><tr>
            <td> Radon gas</td>
            <td>0.90</td>
            <td>1.1</td>
            <td>2.0</td>
            <td>1.2</td>
          </tr><tr>
            <td>Natural Radiation - internal</td>
            <td></td>
            <td></td>
            <td></td>
            <td></td>
          </tr><tr>
            <td>
               $${}^{40}\text{K} \text{,}  {}^{14}\text{C} \text{,}  {}^{226}\text{Ra} $$ 
            </td>
            <td>0.24</td>
            <td>0.28</td>
            <td>0.40</td>
            <td>0.29</td>
          </tr><tr>
            <td>Medical &amp; Dental</td>
            <td>0.80</td>
            <td>0.90</td>
            <td>0.53</td>
            <td>0.40</td>
          </tr><tr>
            <td>TOTAL</td>
            <td>2.6</td>
            <td>3.0</td>
            <td>3.5</td>
            <td>2.8</td>
          </tr></tbody></table>

To physically limit radiation doses, we use **shielding**, increase the **
distance** from a source, and limit the **time of exposure**.

[[Figure 2]](#Figure2) illustrates how these are used to protect both the
patient and the dental technician when an x-ray is taken. Shielding absorbs
radiation and can be provided by any material, including sufficient air. The
greater the distance from the source, the more the radiation spreads out. The
less time a person is exposed to a given source, the smaller is the dose
received by the person. Doses from most medical diagnostics have decreased in
recent years due to faster films that require less exposure time.

![The image shows a dental patient wearing a lead apron sitting in a chair. X-rays emitting from an x-ray tube that is placed on the side of the patient&#x2019;s jaw are passing through only the affected area of his teeth.](../resources/Figure_33_02_02a.jpg "A lead apron is placed over the dental patient and shielding surrounds the x-ray tube to limit exposure to tissue other than the tissue that is being imaged. Fast films limit the time needed to obtain images, reducing exposure to the imaged tissue. The technician stands a few meters away behind a lead-lined door with a lead glass window, reducing her occupational exposure.")
{: #Figure2}

<table id="Table5" summary="This is a two column table. The left column gives a variety of medical procedures involving radiation. The right column lists the corresponding effective doses for each procedure."><caption><span class="title">Typical Doses Received During Diagnostic X-ray Exams</span></caption><thead><tr>
            <th data-align="center">
              Procedure
            </th>
            <th data-align="center">
            Effective dose (mSv)
            </th>
          </tr></thead><tbody><tr>
            <td>
              Chest
            </td>
            <td>
              0.02
            </td>
          </tr><tr>
            <td>
              Dental
            </td>
            <td>
              0.01
            </td>
          </tr><tr>
            <td>
              Skull
            </td>
            <td>
              0.07
            </td>
          </tr><tr>
            <td>
              Leg
            </td>
            <td>
              0.02
            </td>
          </tr><tr>
            <td>
              Mammogram
            </td>
            <td>
              0.40
            </td>
          </tr><tr>
            <td>
              Barium enema
            </td>
            <td>
              7.0
            </td>
          </tr><tr>
            <td>
              Upper GI
            </td>
            <td>
              3.0
            </td>
          </tr><tr>
            <td>
              CT head
            </td>
            <td>
              2.0
            </td>
          </tr><tr>
            <td>
              CT abdomen
            </td>
            <td>
              10.0
            </td>
          </tr></tbody></table>

### Problem-Solving Strategy

You need to follow certain steps for dose calculations, which are

<strong><em>Step 1. </em></strong>*Examine the situation to determine that a
person is exposed to ionizing radiation.*

<strong><em>Step 2. </em></strong>*Identify exactly what needs to be determined
in the problem (identify the unknowns).* The most straightforward problems ask
for a dose calculation.

<strong><em>Step 3. </em></strong>*Make a list of what is given or can be
inferred from the problem as stated (identify the knowns).* Look for information
on the type of radiation, the energy per event, the activity, and the mass of
tissue affected.

<strong><em>Step 4. </em></strong>*For dose calculations, you need to determine
the energy deposited.* This may take one or more steps, depending on the given
information.

<strong><em>Step 5. </em></strong>*Divide the deposited energy by the mass of
the affected tissue.* Use units of joules for energy and kilograms for mass. If
a dose in Sv is involved, use the definition that $$1 \text{Sv = 1 J/kg} $$.

<strong><em>Step 6. </em></strong>*If a dose in mSv is involved, determine the
RBE (QF) of the radiation.* Recall that $$1 mSv=1 mGy×\text{RBE} \left(\text{or}
1 rem=1 rad×\text{RBE}\right) $$.

<strong><em>Step 7. </em></strong>*Check the answer to see if it is reasonable:
Does it make sense?* The dose should be consistent with the numbers given in the
text for diagnostic, occupational, and therapeutic exposures.

<div class="example" markdown="1">
<div class="title">
Dose from Inhaled Plutonium
</div>
Calculate the dose in rem/y for the lungs of a weapons plant employee who inhales and retains an activity of  $$1.00 \text{μCi of} {}^{239}\text{Pu} $$
 in an accident. The mass of affected lung tissue is 2.00 kg, the plutonium decays by emission of a 5.23-MeV  $$\alpha  $$
 particle, and you may assume the higher value of the RBE for  $$\alpha  $$
 s from [[Table 1]](#Table1).

**Strategy**

Dose in rem is defined by $$1 \text{rad}=0.01 \text{J/kg} $$ and
$$\text{rem}=\text{rad}×\text{RBE} $$ . The energy deposited is divided by the
mass of tissue affected and then multiplied by the RBE. The latter two
quantities are given, and so the main task in this example will be to find the
energy deposited in one year. Since the activity of the source is given, we can
calculate the number of decays, multiply by the energy per decay, and convert
MeV to joules to get the total energy.

**Solution**

The activity $$R= 1.00 \text{μCi}=3.70 \times 10^{4} \text{Bq}= 3.70 \times
10^{4} $$ decays/s. So, the number of decays per year is obtained by multiplying
by the number of seconds in a year:

<div class="equation" >
 $$\left( 3.70 \times 10^{4}  \text{decays/s}\right)\left( 3.16 \times 10^{7}  \text{s}\right)= 1.17 \times 10^{12} \text{decays} \text{.}  $$
</div>
Thus, the ionizing energy deposited per year is

<div class="equation" >
 $$E=\left( 1.17 \times 10^{12} \text{decays}\right)\left( 5.23 \text{MeV/decay}\right)×\left(\frac{1.60 \times 10^{-13} \text{J}}{\text{MeV}}\right)= 0.978 \text{J} \text{.}  $$
</div>
Dividing by the mass of the affected tissue gives

<div class="equation" >
 $$\frac{E}{\text{mass}}=\frac{ 0.978 \text{J}}{ 2.00 \text{kg}}=0.489 \text{J/kg} \text{.}  $$
</div>
One Gray is 1.00 J/kg, and so the dose in Gy is

<div class="equation" >
 $$\text{dose in Gy}=\frac{0.489 \text{J/kg}}{1.00 \text{(J/kg)/Gy}}=0.489 Gy. $$
</div>
Now, the dose in Sv is

<div class="equation" >
 $$\text{dose}\text{in}\text{Sv}=\text{Gy}×\text{RBE} $$
</div>
<div class="equation" >
 $$=\left(0.489 Gy\right)\left(20\right)=9.8 \text{Sv} \text{.}  $$
</div>
**Discussion**

First note that the dose is given to two digits, because the RBE is (at best)
known only to two digits. By any standard, this yearly radiation dose is high
and will have a devastating effect on the health of the worker. Worse yet,
plutonium has a long radioactive half-life and is not readily eliminated by the
body, and so it will remain in the lungs. Being an $$\alpha $$ emitter makes the
effects 10 to 20 times worse than the same ionization produced by $$\beta $$ s,
$$\gamma $$ rays, or x-rays. An activity of $$1.00 \mu Ci $$ is created by only
$$16 \mu g $$ of $${}^{239}\text{Pu} $$
(left as an end-of-chapter problem to verify), partly justifying claims that
plutonium is the most toxic substance known. Its actual hazard depends on how
likely it is to be spread out among a large population and then ingested. The
Chernobyl disaster’s deadly legacy, for example, has nothing to do with the
plutonium it put into the environment.

</div>

### Risk versus Benefit

Medical doses of radiation are also limited. Diagnostic doses are generally low
and have further lowered with improved techniques and faster films. With the
possible exception of routine dental x-rays, radiation is used diagnostically
only when needed so that the low risk is justified by the benefit of the
diagnosis. Chest x-rays give the lowest doses—about 0.1 mSv to the tissue
affected, with less than 5 percent scattering into tissues that are not directly
imaged. Other x-ray procedures range upward to about 10 mSv in a CT scan, and
about 5 mSv (0.5 rem) per dental x-ray, again both only affecting the tissue
imaged. Medical images with radiopharmaceuticals give doses ranging from 1 to 5
mSv, usually localized. One exception is the thyroid scan using
$${}^{131}\text{I} $$ . Because of its relatively long half-life, it exposes the
thyroid to about 0.75 Sv. The isotope $${}^{123}\text{I} $$ is more difficult to
produce, but its short half-life limits thyroid exposure to about 15 mSv.

<div class="note" data-has-label="true"  data-label="" markdown="1">
<div class="title">
PhET Explorations: Alpha Decay
</div>
Watch alpha particles escape from a polonium nucleus, causing radioactive alpha decay. See how random decay times relate to the half life.

<figure markdown="1">
<figcaption>
[Alpha Decay](alpha-decay_en.jar)
</figcaption>
<span class="media" id="Phet_module_32.2" data-alt=""> [![](../resources/PhET_Icon.png){: data-print="false"}](alpha-decay_en.jar){: class="image"} <span data-media-type="image/png" data-print="true" data-src="PhET_Icon.png" class="image" width="450"></span> </span>
</figure>
</div>

### Section Summary

* The biological effects of ionizing radiation are due to two effects it has on
  cells: interference with cell reproduction, and destruction of cell function.
* A radiation dose unit called the rad is defined in terms of the ionizing
  energy deposited per kilogram of tissue:

  <div class="equation" >
   $$1 rad=0.01 \text{J/kg}. $$
  </div>

* The SI unit for radiation dose is the gray  (Gy), which is defined to be $$1
  Gy = 1 J/kg = 100 rad. $$
* To account for the effect of the type of particle creating the ionization, we
  use the relative biological effectiveness (RBE) or quality factor (QF) given
  in [[Table 1]](#Table1) and define a unit called the roentgen equivalent man (
  rem) as

  <div class="equation" >
   $$\text{rem}=\text{rad}×\text{RBE}. $$
  </div>

* Particles that have short ranges or create large ionization densities have
  RBEs greater than unity. The SI equivalent of the rem is the sievert (Sv),
  defined to be

  <div class="equation" >
   $$\text{Sv}=\text{Gy}×\text{RBE}\text{and} 1 \text{Sv}=100 \text{rem} \text{.}  $$
  </div>

* Whole-body, single-exposure doses of 0.1 Sv or less are low doses while those
  of 0.1 to 1 Sv are moderate, and those over 1 Sv are high doses. Some
  immediate radiation effects are given in [[Table 3]](#Table3). Effects due to
  low doses are not observed, but their risk is assumed to be directly
  proportional to those of high doses, an assumption known as the linear
  hypothesis. Long-term effects are cancer deaths at the rate of $$10/10^{6}
  \text{rem·y} $$ and genetic defects at roughly one-third this rate. Background
  radiation doses and sources are given in [[Table 4]](#Table4). World-wide
  average radiation exposure from natural sources, including radon, is about 3
  mSv, or 300 mrem. Radiation protection utilizes shielding, distance, and time
  to limit exposure.

### Conceptual Questions

<div class="exercise" data-element-type="conceptual-questions">
<div class="problem" markdown="1">
Isotopes that emit  $$\alpha  $$
 radiation are relatively safe outside the body and exceptionally hazardous inside. Yet those that emit  $$\gamma  $$
 radiation are hazardous outside and inside. Explain why.

</div>
</div>

<div class="exercise" data-element-type="conceptual-questions">
<div class="problem" markdown="1">
Why is radon more closely associated with inducing lung cancer than other types of cancer?

</div>
</div>

<div class="exercise" data-element-type="conceptual-questions">
<div class="problem" markdown="1">
The RBE for low-energy  $$\beta  $$
s is 1.7, whereas that for higher-energy  $$\beta  $$
s is only 1. Explain why, considering how the range of radiation depends on its energy.

</div>
</div>

<div class="exercise" data-element-type="conceptual-questions">
<div class="problem" markdown="1">
Which methods of radiation protection were used in the device shown in the first photo in [[Figure 3]](#Figure3)? Which were used in the situation shown in the second photo?

(a)

![Figure A shows a &#x201C;shoe fitting x-ray device.&#x201D; Figure B shows a group of people wearing white protective suits standing near a yellow radiation hazard sign.](../resources/Figure_33_02_03a.jpg "(a) This x-ray fluorescence machine is one of the thousands used in shoe stores to produce images of feet as a check on the fit of shoes. They are unshielded and remain on as long as the feet are in them, producing doses much greater than medical images. Children were fascinated with them. These machines were used in shoe stores until laws preventing such unwarranted radiation exposure were enacted in the 1950s. (credit: Andrew Kuchling ) (b) Now that we know the effects of exposure to radioactive material, safety is a priority. (credit: U.S. Navy)")
{: #Figure3}

</div>
</div>

<div class="exercise" data-element-type="conceptual-questions">
<div class="problem" markdown="1">
What radioisotope could be a problem in homes built of cinder blocks made from uranium mine tailings? (This is true of homes and schools in certain regions near uranium mines.)

</div>
</div>

<div class="exercise" data-element-type="conceptual-questions">
<div class="problem" markdown="1">
Are some types of cancer more sensitive to radiation than others? If so, what makes them more sensitive?

</div>
</div>

<div class="exercise" data-element-type="conceptual-questions">
<div class="problem" markdown="1">
Suppose a person swallows some radioactive material by accident. What information is needed to be able to assess possible damage?

</div>
</div>

### Problems &amp; Exercises

<div class="exercise" data-element-type="problems-exercises">
<div class="problem" markdown="1">
What is the dose in mSv for: (a) a 0.1 Gy x-ray? (b) 2.5 mGy of neutron exposure to the eye? (c) 1.5 mGy of  $$\alpha  $$
 exposure?

</div>
<div class="solution" markdown="1">
(a) 100 mSv

(b) 80 mSv

(c) ~30 mSv

</div>
</div>

<div class="exercise" data-element-type="problems-exercises">
<div class="problem" markdown="1">
Find the radiation dose in Gy for: (a) A 10-mSv fluoroscopic x-ray series. (b) 50 mSv of skin exposure by an  $$\alpha  $$
 emitter. (c) 160 mSv of  $${\beta }^{-} $$
 and  $$\gamma  $$
 rays from the  $${}^{40}\text{K} $$
 in your body.

</div>
</div>

<div class="exercise" data-element-type="problems-exercises">
<div class="problem" markdown="1">
How many Gy of exposure is needed to give a cancerous tumor a dose of 40 Sv if it is exposed to  $$\alpha  $$
 activity?

</div>
<div class="solution" markdown="1">
~2 Gy

</div>
</div>

<div class="exercise" data-element-type="problems-exercises">
<div class="problem" markdown="1">
What is the dose in Sv in a cancer treatment that exposes the patient to 200 Gy of  $$\gamma  $$
 rays?

</div>
</div>

<div class="exercise" data-element-type="problems-exercises">
<div class="problem" markdown="1">
One half the  $$\gamma  $$
 rays from  $${}^{99 \text{m}}\text{Tc} $$
 are absorbed by a 0.170-mm-thick lead shielding. Half of the  $$\gamma  $$
 rays that pass through the first layer of lead are absorbed in a second layer of equal thickness. What thickness of lead will absorb all but one in 1000 of these  $$\gamma  $$
 rays?

</div>
<div class="solution" markdown="1">
1.69 mm

</div>
</div>

<div class="exercise" data-element-type="problems-exercises">
<div class="problem" markdown="1">
A plumber at a nuclear power plant receives a whole-body dose of 30 mSv in 15 minutes while repairing a crucial valve. Find the radiation-induced yearly risk of death from cancer and the chance of genetic defect from this maximum allowable exposure.

</div>
</div>

<div class="exercise" data-element-type="problems-exercises">
<div class="problem" markdown="1">
In the 1980s, the term picowave was used to describe food irradiation in order to overcome public resistance by playing on the well-known safety of microwave radiation. Find the energy in MeV of a photon having a wavelength of a picometer.

</div>
<div class="solution" markdown="1">
1.24 MeV

</div>
</div>

<div class="exercise" data-element-type="problems-exercises">
<div class="problem" markdown="1">
Find the mass of  $${}^{239}\text{Pu} $$
 that has an activity of  $$1.00 \text{μCi} $$.

</div>
</div>

<div class="footnote-refs" markdown="1">
### Footnotes
{: class="footnote-refs-title"}

* {: class="footnote-ref" #footnote1} [1](#footnote-ref1){: class="
  footnote-ref-link"} <span class="footnote-ref-content">Values approximate,
  difficult to determine.</span>
* {: class="footnote-ref" #footnote2} [2](#footnote-ref2){: class="
  footnote-ref-link"} <span class="footnote-ref-content">Multiply by 100 to
  obtain dose in rem.</span>
* {: class="footnote-ref" #footnote3} [3](#footnote-ref3){: class="
  footnote-ref-link"} <span class="footnote-ref-content">Multiply by 100 to
  obtain dose in mrem/y.</span>
  {: data-list-type="bulleted" data-bullet-style="none"}

</div>

<div class="glossary" markdown="1">
### Glossary
{: class="glossary-title"}

gray (Gy)
: the SI unit for radiation dose which is defined to be $$1 Gy=1 J/kg=100
\text{rad} $$

linear hypothesis
: assumption that risk is directly proportional to risk from high doses

rad
: the ionizing energy deposited per kilogram of tissue

sievert
: the SI equivalent of the rem

relative biological effectiveness (RBE)
: a number that expresses the relative amount of damage that a fixed amount of
ionizing radiation of a given type can inflict on biological tissues

quality factor
: same as relative biological effectiveness

roentgen equivalent man (rem)
: a dose unit more closely related to effects in biological tissue

low dose
: a dose less than 100 mSv (10 rem)

moderate dose
: a dose from 0.1 Sv to 1 Sv (10 to 100 rem)

high dose
: a dose greater than 1 Sv (100 rem)

hormesis
: a term used to describe generally favorable biological responses to low
exposures of toxins or radiation

shielding
: a technique to limit radiation exposure 

</div>
